---
title: OOA & OOD
permalink: /docs/6-oop2-2/
---

## Object Oriented Analysis and Design (OOA & OOD)

In software engineering we think about developing software in a number of stages.  

The basic stages are shown below. 

1. Analysis
2. Design
3. Coding
4. Testing
5. Delivery

Some approaches add more stages and/or split these five in to more stages. Some approaches aim to fully complete each stage before moving on to the next, other approaches focus on a single aspect of the software, complete all the stages for that then move on to the next aspect and start again. Regardless of the approach we begin by *analysing* the software problem and *designing* a solution to it.  

### Analysis

I've given you exercises with a description of the software that should be created. This description is the results of me carrying out an analysis of a problem.

For example in the ToDo List exercise, this began with the idea of a ToDo list application. I *analysed* what that meant, what a ToDo list should do, how it should be controlled and what sort of information it would store. This allowed me to put together a description of what the ToDo List application should do for the exercises. It didn't describe how the application should implement the ToDo List, only what it needed to do (heh).  

In Software Engineering we generally call the description that comes out of the *analysis* stage the **requirements** or **specification** for the software (sometimes even the requirements specification).

So for the ToDo List the **requirements** looked something like.

> The ToDo List application is an application for tracking actions that the user wants to be reminded about. It must be able to store multiple descriptions of tasks, each made up of one or more words. The user should be able to add new tasks to the application and remove completed tasks. When started the application should display the current task list and ask if the user wants to add a task, complete a task or quit. If the user adds or completes a task the updated task list should be displayed and the user given the same prompt. If the user chooses to quit the application will exit.
> A lower priority requirement is the functionality to give each task an importance rating and to display the list of tasks sorted by importance.
> The functionality to save/load the task list to file automatically is a very low priority requirement.

It describes what is required of the application and assigns importance to the various parts of the functionality. 

### Design

Once we have the **requirements** for software we can then **design** that software. In this stage we look at what the software should do and work out how to make the software do it. How detailed we get in this stage depends on the situation. Working for a company they may have a policy on what a design looks like. When it comes to university assessments the brief/marking guide may tell you explicitly what is required or may be more vague. (We like to be very specific with first year work, more general with second year work and open with third year work).

### Object Oriented Design

Object oriented design, unsurprisingly, focuses on identifying and describing the objects that are required and how they will interact with each other.  

> A brief bit of advice. A pen and paper are great design tools when it comes to software. Make some notes, doodle some diagrams and see what objects you come up with and how they will interact. Often things don't come to light until you start to see the way things are fitting together. Often you see that something is wrong and will need to be reworked. If you begin on paper that's easy and very little effort is wasted. If you start coding right away it can take longer to notice the problem and we have a tendency to try to work round the problem rather than fix it. We don't want to abandon code that we've put effort in to. Make the mistakes on paper, that's easy to throw away.

If you've been given a requirements that's where to start. Read through it, make sure you understand it and then read through it again looking for nouns. A noun is a word that describes a thing, a person, an animal or a place. Its often more of a conceptual thing in software - a level, a file, etc. Examine all the nouns in the requirements. Chances are most of the objects you will need will be in that list of nouns. Not every noun will be an object, some will be member variables of objects, others may be completely irrelevant.  

So take you list of nouns and divide it in to three groups - objects, data that should be part of an object, and stuff you can probably ignore (just set them to the side, they might be important later).  

Next look at your list of object nouns. Do any of them describe classes rather than objects? If the requirements says 

  "the people in the company are George and Sarah are managers, the engineers are Phil and Kate, and the sales-people Jay and Kay"
  
then we've picked out the nouns *company*, *people*, *George*, *Sarah*, *manager*, *Phil*, *Kate*, *engineer*, *sales-person*, *Jay*, *Kay*. Setting aside *company* for the moment, the others are all people related. We can identify *George, Sarah, Phil, Kate, Jay* and *Kay* as specific people, they would be objects in the system. *person, manager, engineer, sales-person* are all generic descriptions so would be classes in the system. (We've converted them to the singular).  

We can further identify that *manager, engineer* and *sales-person* are all jobs done by a *person* so we almost certainly want a *person* parent class with *manager, engineer* and *sales-person* child classes.  

Go through the entire requirements and do this. Then take a look at your list of classed and objects. Are there any duplicates? Does anything seem to be missing?  

Think about what each class *knows* and what it *does* - this helps you work towards working out what member variables and class methods it will need. If you've identified a class that has data in it but no methods then it probably shouldn't be a class, it should probably be data in another class. We've used **nouns** to identify classes, objects and/or data, we can uses **verbs** (doing words) to help identify methods.  

Think about how the objects will interact in the program. One of your classes will have a `main` method. Nothing will happen, no object will do anything unless your `main` tells it to (directly or indirectly). Later on we'll look at some diagrams that help to visualise the interactions but for now think about what your application has to do, think about the steps involved in making it happen and which objects are involved when.  

#### ToDo List Design 

We've got a vary simple requirements description for our ToDo List application

> The ToDo List application is an application for tracking actions that the user wants to be reminded about. It must be able to store multiple descriptions of tasks, each made up of one or more words. The user should be able to add new tasks to the application and remove completed tasks. When started the application should display the current task list and ask if the user wants to add a task, complete a task or quit. If the user adds or completes a task the updated task list should be displayed and the user given the same prompt. If the user chooses to quit the application will exit.
> A lower priority requirement is the functionality to give each task an importance rating and to display the list of tasks sorted by importance.
> The functionality to save/load the task list to file automatically is a very low priority requirement.

We'll ignore the lower priority functionality for the time being.

* **Nouns** ToDo List, action, user, task, task description, user
* **Verbs** track, remind, add task, remove completed task, quit, display list

Looking at the nouns
* *ToDo List* is a list of tasks. 
* *action* and *task* are the same thing, we'll drop *action* and keep *task*. 
* *task description* is a string of text describing the task.

We can identify a *ToDo List* object that will store a list of tasks. Each task could be an object but it just contains a string and doesn't have any methods so we'll just make the list of tasks a list of string in the *ToDo List* object.  

Okay, that's nice and easy, we've got our `Main` class containing a `main` method to run the application and we've got a `ToDo List` class that will store and manipulate a list of strings (for the tasks).  

What will our `ToDo List` class be able to do? What methods will it have? Lets look at the verbs. *add task*, *remove completed task* and *display list* jump out as methods the `ToDo List` should probably have. The list is part of the class so it should be in charge of changing and displaying the list. 

Our `Main` will manage the running of the application. It will tell `ToDo List` to display the task list to the screen, it will read in the users commands and tell the `ToDo List` to add a new task or complete a task, and it will close the application down if the user chooses to quit.

> This might look a little confusing - `ToDo List` is in charge of adding items to the list but `Main` tells it to add items to the list, isn't that contradictory? No, the list of tasks is data within `ToDo List` and only `ToDo List` should change that data. But the application needs to be able to trigger those changes so `ToDo List` will have *public* methods that can be called to make changes to the list.  

We've got two classes.  

|**Main**|
|---|
|Member Variables|
|*ToDo List taskList*|
|---|
|Class Methods|
|*getCommandFromUser()*|
|*carryOutCommand(String command)*|
|*quit()*|

|**ToDo List**|
|---|
|Member Variables|
|*ArrayList of String tasks*|
|---|
|Class Methods|
|*displayList()*|
|*addTask(string newTask)*|
|*completeTask(int taskNumber)*|

That is a very basic design for a very simple setup. It'll get a little more involved if we add in the lower priority functionality.  

We can at this point start coding. We can create an application and add a `ToDo List` class. We can add an ArrayList of strings to `ToDo List` and add three methods with parameters and return types, even if we can't fill them in right away. Similarly we know our Main will need to create an object of the `ToDo List` class and we can create the templates for its methods.

```java
import java.util.*;

public class Main {

  public static ToDo toDoList = new ToDo();

  public static void main(String[] args) {  
  }

  public static String getCommandFromUser(){

  }

  public static void carryOutCommand(String command)
  {

  }
  
  public static void quit()
  {

  }
}

public class ToDo {
  List<String> tasks = new ArrayList<String>();

  public void displayList(){

  }

  public void addTask(string newTask){

  }

  public void completeTask(int taskNumber){

  }
}
```

If we are using an ArrayList to store our tasks as strings then we can easily fill in `ToDo`'s methods.  

```java
public class ToDo {
  List<String> tasks = new ArrayList<String>();

  public void displayList(){
    // loop through and display each entry in tasks, output task number too
      for (int i=0; i< tasks.size();i++){
        System.out.println(i + ". " + entries.get(i));
      }
  }

  public void addTask(string newTask){
    // newTask contains a new entry to add to the list.
    tasks.add(newTask);
  }

  public void completeTask(int taskNumber){
    // remove task number taskNumber from the list
    entries.remove(taskNumber);
  }
}
```

We can then turn our attention to `Main` and work out how to use this class. I won't go through it here since its a general coding exercise from this point but the solution is [here](https://repl.it/@andyguest/javaWk4Ex3Solution) and I'll work through it in the lab session this week.  


    
